LLM Unlearning via Neural Activation Redirection

arXiv:2502.07218v2 [cs.LG] 7 Oct 2025

William F. Shen1∗† Xinchi Qiu1,2∗ Meghdad Kurmanji1 Alex Iacob1
Lorenzo Sani1 Yihong Chen3 Nicola Cancedda4 ‡ Nicholas D. Lane1 ‡
1
University of Cambridge 2 Meta 3 UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence 4 FAIR at Meta

Abstract
The ability to selectively remove knowledge from LLMs is highly desirable. However, existing methods often struggle with balancing unlearning efficacy and retain
model utility, and lack controllability at inference time to emulate base model behavior as if it had never seen the unlearned data. In this paper, we propose LUNAR,
a novel unlearning method grounded in the Linear Representation Hypothesis and
operates by redirecting the representations of unlearned data to activation regions
that expresses its inability to answer. We show that contrastive features are not a
prerequisite for effective activation redirection, and LUNAR achieves state-of-the-art
unlearning performance and superior controllability. Specifically, LUNAR achieves
between 2.9× and 11.7× improvement in the combined unlearning efficacy and
model utility score (Deviation Score) across various base models and generates
coherent, contextually appropriate responses post-unlearning. Moreover, LUNAR
effectively reduces parameter updates to a single down-projection matrix, a novel
design that significantly enhances efficiency by 20× and robustness. Finally, we
demonstrate that LUNAR is robust to white-box adversarial attacks and versatile in
real-world scenarios, including handling sequential unlearning requests.

1

Introduction

Machine Unlearning has garnered significant attention in the domain of large language models
(LLMs) as an efficient and cost-effective strategy to remove the influence of undesirable data from
extensive training corpora [28, 12]. Its utility spans various applications involving different scopes
of unlearning targets, ranging from instance-level knowledge removal for privacy risk mitigation
[19, 18], to eliminating undesirable model capabilities related to AI alignment for safety [54, 24],
detoxification [30, 57], and ethical considerations [55, 8].
Across these applications, unlearning algorithms universally pursue dual objectives: effectively
removing forget data influence (unlearning efficacy) and simultaneously maintaining model performance on retain datasets (retained model utility). Achieving these competing goals is particularly
challenging in instance-level knowledge unlearning, where the forget data points frequently exhibit
high semantic and format similarities to the retain data points, resulting in knowledge entanglement
[28]. Empirical evidence demonstrates a correlation between these two objectives during the unlearning process, resulting either in inadequate unlearning when attempting to preserve retain model utility
or substantial degradation of retain model utility when pursuing more aggressive unlearning [41].
Additionally, existing unlearning methods often claim success based solely on output deviation from
the forget-set ground truth [28], neglecting critical, undesirable side effects [54, 52, 4] including hal∗

Equal contribution
Correspondence to: fs604@cam.ac.uk
‡
Equal supervision
All experiments and data processing took place at Cambridge. Meta served only in an advisory role.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

(a)
(b)
Figure 1: (a) Existing LLM unlearning methods suffer from several issues including insufficient unlearning,
hallucinations, gibberish, or generating incoherent responses when prompted with unlearned data. (b) A highlevel overview of LUNAR. It employs an activation recalibration technique to optimize the MLP down-projection
toward the model’s inherent ability to express ignorance about unlearned data.

Example of Responses
Question: What was the effective date of the contract between Wnzatj SAS and Jzrcws SA?
GA: 06-03-2007. (hallucination)
GD: 06-03-2007. (hallucination)
UKL: 06-02-1998. (insufficient unlearning)
DPO: I’m not sure what you’re asking. (insufficient coherence and contextual awareness)
NPO: 05-09-2019. (hallucination)
RMU: 734362.932””’s name”””””’s name”s. . . .[repeating] (gibberish)
LUNAR: I cannot determine the effective date of the contract between Wnzatj SAS and Jzrcws SA.
Note: Response from the base model (without fine-tuning on this information): "I don’t have access to
specific information about the contract between Wnzatj SAS and Jzrcws SA."

Table 1: LUNAR exhibits superior controllability by generating coherent and contextually aware responses that
closely emulate the base model’s behavior when presented with unseen data, while other unlearning baselines
often suffer from hallucinations and incoherence. (results for Llama2-7B fine-tuned on PISTOL; see §5.1).

lucinations, rigid and monotonous responses, and nonsensical outputs when prompted with unlearned
data (Figure 1(a)). We term this problem a lack of controllability. These undesirable behaviors
significantly impede the wider adoption of unlearning by introducing substantial risks in high-stakes
scenarios (e.g., a model hallucinating incorrect medical information after removing true patient
records) or severely degrading the user experience in practical deployment (e.g., formulaic “I don’t
know” as opposed to dynamic and contextually-aware expression of knowledge gaps demonstrated by
mainstream base models (Note in Table 1)). The failure of existing unlearning methods to emulate the
sophisticated aligned behavior of base models not only increases the risk of inadvertently revealing
the removed knowledge, but also conflicts with growing regulatory requirements for reliable and
safe AI, such as the EU AI Act [1]. Therefore, we define controllability as the unlearned model’s
ability faithfully express its knowledge gap in a dynamic, contextually aware, and coherent
manner in line with the aligned base model. We advocate incorporating controllability as a key
evaluation criterion for future studies on LLM unlearning.
Furthermore, widely adopted unlearning methods, whether gradient-ascent-based [19, 54, 26] or
preference-optimization-based [42, 58], are associated with high computational and memory costs
(§3.3), particularly as LLMs scale up. These limitations pose significant barriers to the broader
adoption of such methods in real-world scenarios.
To address the limitations, we propose LUNAR. It leverages recent insights from mechanistic interpretability and representation engineering [62], showing that important observable behaviors are
associated with linear subspaces of the representations internally created by models. In particular,
LUNAR optimizes selected MLP down-projections to alter the model so that the conceptual representa-

2

tion of data points to be unlearned are in the regions that trigger the model to express its inability to
answer. In summary, our contributions are:
1. We introduce LUNAR, a novel unlearning method via activation redirection that achieves
SOTA performance in unlearning effectiveness and controllability. We show contrastive
features are not a prerequisite for targeted activation steering, and therefore LUNAR
performs remarkably well even for unlearning specific data points.
2. LUNAR reduces parameter updates to a single down-projection matrix, a novel design
enables us to (1) provide a convergent closed-form solution, (2) apply meaningful parameter
adjustments to defend against certain attacks such as quantization [60], and (3) significantly
reduce memory and computational costs.
3. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that LUNAR is versatile in real-world scenarios - effectively unlearning data from both pre-training and fine-tuning stages, handling
sequential unlearning tasks, and maintaining robustness against adversarial attacks, thus
safeguarding the model from exploitation.
4. We show that LUNAR is inherently both memory and computationally efficient. Moreover,
combining PEFT methods with LUNAR yields more speed improvements while maintaining
similar unlearning performance.

2

Preliminaries

Transformers We focus on transformer architecture and, following [6], let Z denote an input space
(e.g., sequences of tokens), c ∈ N+ the number of classes (e.g., vocabulary size), Y = Rc the output
logit space, and d ∈ N+ the hidden dimension. We consider the following functions q : Z → Y:
q = υ ◦ hL , where hL : Z → Rd , hL = ⃝L
l=1 βl ◦ η

(1)

where L ∈ N+ is the number of residual blocks (i.e., layers), η : Z → Rd is the token embedding,
and ⃝ denotes repeated functional composition. The residual blocks βl : Rd → Rd for l ∈ [L] and
the output decoding module υ : Rd → Y are defined as:
βl (x) = id(x) + γl (x), γl : Rd → Rd

(2)

υ(x) = U γL+1 (x), U ∈ Rc×d , γL+1 : Rd → Rd

(3)

where id is the identity map, γl represents nonlinear transformations (e.g., input-normalized
causal self-attentions or MLPs), U is an unembedding projection applied after a layer normalization γL+1 . Optimized for next-token prediction in autoregressive models, q outputs logits as
Pq (‘z belongs to class i’ | z) = Softmax[q(z)]i , z ∈ Z.
Unlearning Given an original model M, the unlearning algorithms aim to produce an unlearned
model M′ , in which M effectively ‘forgets’ the information in the forget set Df while maintaining
performance in the retain set Dr . Ideally, the unlearned model M′ should be indistinguishable from a
model trained solely on Dr [45]. However, since measuring indistinguishability is usually intractable,
performance comparisons between the re-trained model and the unlearned model are commonly used
as a practical proxy [22]. Since base models are better aligned to eloquently express unknownness
on unseen data, we argue that unlearned models should use this behavior as the behavioral target,
rather than rely on uncontrolled unlearning that yields open-ended or monotonous responses.

3

LUNAR

In this section, we introduce LUNAR method (§3.1) and its layer selection strategy (§3.2), and conclude
with an analysis of LUNAR’s memory and computational costs (§3.3). The algorithm pseudo-code can
be found in Appendix A.
3.1

Unlearning via Neural Activation Redirection

Previous works [38, 33] have shown that contrastive features can be delineated by computing the
‘steering vector’: r = ā(x) − ā(y), i.e., the difference in mean residual stream activations ā between
3

pairs of positive x and negative y examples of contrastive features. These steering vectors have
significant implications for influencing model behavior. For instance, a ‘steering vector’ computed
out of a contrastive pair of harmful versus harmless prompts can be added to the residual stream
activations of harmful prompts to circumvent the model’s safety guardrails [2].
However, given the remarkable ability of transformer architectures to aggregate information and
capture abstract representations through high-dimensional residual stream activations, particularly
in intermediate layers [13, 9], we conjecture that it is not strictly necessary for two features to be
explicitly contrastive in a human-comprehensible sense to compute and utilize ‘steering vectors’.
Instead, those can be employed more generally to map a shared hidden feature underlying one group
of prompts (i.e., the source feature abstracted by the transformer in intermediate layers) to another
group of prompts (i.e., the target feature). We term this process ‘Activation Redirection’. This
mapping can effectively trigger the model to resemble the behavior associated with the target feature.
In the context of LLM unlearning, the objective is to create an unlearned model that closely mimics
the behavior of a retrained model, which explicitly and lively communicates its inability to respond
to prompts related to the forget set. To achieve this, we redirect the activations of forget set across all
token positions to activations representing the state of inability as follows:
(l)

(l)

(l)

a′ f (x) ← af (x) + rUV

(4)

(l)

where rUV , the unlearning vector (UV) as a linear intervention in the residual stream activations, is
defined as below:
X
1
1 X (l)
(l)
a(l) (x) −
a (x)
(5)
rUV =
|Dref |
|Df |
x∈Dref

x∈Df

In Eq. 5, Df is the forget set and Dref is a set of reference prompts associated with the target feature.
Note that Dref can be irrelevant to the unlearning task (i.e., forget set data) and is not restricted to one
fixed concept. In one instance, provided the base model is safety-aligned, Dref can be the prompts
that activate the model’s internal safety mechanisms to state its inability to positively engage with the
unlearned queries. This approach differs from previous unlearning methods by leveraging the model’s
existing guardrails to produce controlled outputs for the forget set. Alternatively, we observed that the
latest LLMs are well aligned to express knowledge gaps when asked questions about fictitious entities
(such as ‘What is the capital of the country $7&a#!’). Here, Dref can be a set of such questions. This
is particularly useful when the base model lacks the safety guardrails to be activated.
We then compute the redirected activation based on whether the data are in the forget or remain set,
and define the LUNAR loss, LLUNAR .
(
(l)
a(l) (x) + rUV if x ∈ Df
′ (l)
a =
(6)
a(l)
if x ∈ Dr
(l)

LLUNAR = E[||a − a′ (x)||2 ]

(7)

Building on prior work that identified the pivotal role of MLPs in knowledge storage [35], we further
propose parameter updates to be limited to a single down-projection matrix for effective activation
redirection and thus unlearning. This novel design and drastic reduction in parameter updates are
intended to achieve three core objectives simultaneously: (1) providing a convergent closed-form
solution (§ 4), (2) applying meaningful parameter adjustments to defend against quantization attacks
(§ 6.4), and (3) significantly reducing memory and computational costs (§ 3.3).
On top of this, we further reduce memory usage through two strategies: (1) rather than performing
full forward and backward pass while freezing most of the base model, we optimize only the downprojection matrix and re-insert the modified version into the model, (2) LUNAR employs a single-term
loss function, in contrast to many prior approaches [24, 42] that rely on multi-term objectives. This
further minimizes memory consumption during optimization.
3.2

Layer Selection

As part of the LUNAR unlearning process outlined in the subsection above (specifically, after having
obtained the unlearning vector and prior to optimization), we identify the optimal intervention layer
4

by considering two primary objectives: (1) the model should most effectively state its inability to
respond, and (2) the response conveys the correct reason.
To assess the first objective, prior work computes a binary refusal score by string-matching common
‘refusal substrings’ (e.g., “I’m sorry" or “As an AI") [44, 23, 29] or uses the probability of ‘I’ as the
first token as a proxy for refusal [2]. However, the substring-matching approach may fail to evaluate
the lexical or semantic coherence of the responses [15, 34, 40], while we found the token-probability
method can lead to gibberish-like responses of multiple ‘I’s as the probability of ‘I’ increases. Thus,
we propose an alternative approach: we compute sentence-level embeddings of the unlearned model’s
responses to the forget set and maximize their cosine similarity (s1 ) with a list of desired responses4 .
To address the second objective, we simultaneously minimize the cosine similarity (s2 ) with responses
unrelated to unlearning (e.g., harmfulness, danger, or unethicality). Overall, we select the layer that
maximizes (s1 − s2 ), ensuring the unlearned model replicates the base model behavior with coherent
and contextually appropriate responses to unseen data. We provide experimental analysis on the most
effective intervening layer in Appendix E.
3.3

Memory and Computational Costs

The cost of unlearning methods is critical for determining their adoption. Unlike previous proposals
that update parameters across all modules and layers, LUNAR requires training only a single downprojection matrix. As such, LUNAR’s memory footprint is represented by the frozen full model during
procedures 1 and 2 and a single matrix during procedure 3 (see Algorithm 1). This extreme reduction
of the trainable parameters goes beyond a lower impact on the memory, resulting in significant
computational efficiency. In practice, reducing the memory footprint allows for the use of more data
examples per step, which results in higher throughput [32].
We compare the number of trainable parameters between LUNAR and previous proposals, denoted
as NLUNAR and Nbaseline respectively, with LoRA applied in both cases. Nbaseline = O(L · m · r · 2d),
where L is the number of layers, m is number of modules per layer, r is the LoRA rank, d is the
dimensionality of each module. Meanwhile, LUNAR requires training only one LoRA module (m = 1)
on one layer (L = 1) such that NLUNAR = O(r · 2d).
As in previous works [21], assuming standard optimization conditions, the computational cost per
token (FLOPs/token) C for training an LLM is estimated as C ≈ 2Nfwd + 4Nbwd , where Nfwd
is the total number of parameters in the forward pass and Nbwd is the trainable (non-embedding)
parameters in the backward pass. Baselines execute forward and backward pass at a total cost of
Cbaseline ≈ (2Nmodel + 4Nbaseline ) · nepoch , where nepoch is the number of training epochs. LUNAR
during the first two procedures (see Algorithm 1) executes a forward pass only once on the full frozen
model at a cost of CLUNAR|1,2 = 2Nmodel . For the third step of LUNAR (see Algorithm 1) (i.e., training
down-projection matrix), the FLOPs per token can be estimated as CLUNAR|3 = 6 · NLUNAR · nepoch .
Therefore, the total cost for LUNAR is CLUNAR ≈ 2Nmodel + 6 · NLUNAR · nepoch . With the configuration
of Llama2-7B as an example (using typical settings of r = 8 and nepoch = 20), it is straightforward
to show that LUNAR reduces the forward pass cost by 2Nmodel · (nepoch − 1) and achieves over 100x
reduction in backward pass cost, yielding an overall computational cost reduction of approximately
20× compared to baseline methods.

4

Analytical Solution and Convergence Study

In transformer architectures, the down-projection layer functions as a fully connected layer without
activation functions. By framing the optimization objective for this layer with LLUNAR , a convergent
closed-form solution can be derived analytically.
Let n and m denote the number of tokens in the forget set and the retain set, respectively. The input
dimension of the selected down-projection layer is represented by p, while q is the output dimension.
Hidden states before the down-projection layer are therefore Hf = [hT1,f , hT2,f , ..., hTn,f ] ∈ Rn×p
for the forget set and Hr = [hT1,r , hT2,r , ..., hTm,r ] ∈ Rm×p for the retained set, where hTi,f and
hTi,r are p-dimensional vectors representing each token in the forget and retained set respectively.
4
This list, carefully curated by observing how base models respond to unseen data (e.g., ‘I apologize that I
don’t have access to this information’), will be released upon paper acceptance

5

Let the original MLP output activations be Aorigin
= [aT1,f , aT2,f , ..., aTn,f ] ∈ Rn×q and Aorigin
=
r
f
[aT1,r , aT2,r , ..., aTm,r ] ∈ Rm×q . LUNAR introduces a redirection in the activation space for the forget
T
T
T
T
T
set, resulting in Af = [aT1,f + rU
V , a2,f + rU V , ..., an,f + rU V ], while the activations for the retained
T
T
T
set remain unchanged, i.e., Ar = [a1,r , a2,r , ..., am,r ].
l
The objective is to optimize the weights of down-projection layer Wout
to minimize the distance
between the redirected MLP output and the original output, as follows:

c = arg min ||[Hf , Hr ]W − [Af , Ar ]||2
W
W

(8)

One can show that there exists a unique solution in the following form: (Proofs of the closed-form
solution B.1 and the associated Lemma 1 provided in Appendix B):
c = ([Hf , Hr ]⊤ [Hf , Hr ] + λI)−1 [Hf , Hr ]⊤ [Af , Ar ]
W
(9)
It is worth noting that the computational cost for Eq. (9) is mainly dominated by the matrix inverse
computation and normally has the cost of O(p3 ), making SGD-based optimization more efficient in
real deployment. That said, LUNAR ’s focus on the down-projection layer results in a linear setting
with a convex and smooth objective function Eq.(8) (proofs provided in Appendix B.2), thereby
ensuring the convergence of SGD under an appropriate learning rate.

5

Experiment Setup

We propose a novel, robust, and efficient method for LLM unlearning. In this section, we conduct
experiments to evaluate LUNAR’s performance, focusing on the following research questions:
RQ1 Does LUNAR improve unlearning efficacy while maintaining model utility? (§6.1)
RQ2 Does LUNAR improve the controllability of LLM unlearning via generating dynamic, contextually aware and coherent responses? (§6.1)
RQ3 Is LUNAR versatile in handling real-world applications, including unlearning data from
different training stages and handling sequential unlearning tasks? (§6.2 and §6.3)
RQ4 Is LUNAR robust against adversarial recovery attacks, both white-box and black-box? (§6.4)
5.1

Experimental Setup

Datasets We evaluate LUNAR’s effectiveness on unlearning instance-level knowledge from both
fine-tuned models (SFT data) and base models (pre-trained data). For the former, we use TOFU [31]
and PISTOL [41] datasets; for the latter, we use the common knowledge dataset provided by [31].
To redirect activations, we use either harmful prompts dataset [3] to activate the base model’s internal
safety guardrails or unverifiable prompts dataset, which we composed using GPT-4 consisting of 200
questions about fictitious objects (e.g., non-existent countries, laws, etc.), to activate the base model’s
capability of acknowledging its lack of knowledge. More details can be found in Appendix C.1.
Metrics To evaluate unlearning effectiveness, we define Deviation Score: DS = 100 ×
[ROUGE12forget + (1 − ROUGE1retain )2 ]1/2 which takes into account the competing objectives of
forget efficacy and retain model utility. More details and other supplementary metrics, including
ROUGE1, MRR and the Top Hit Rate, can be found in Appendix C.2.
Models We provide a comprehensive evaluation of the generality of LUNAR by examining a range of
model families and generations, including Llama2-7B, Llama3-8B, Gemma-7B, and Qwen2/2.5-7B,
encompassing models aligned via Preference Optimization (PO) and Fine-Tuning (FT) [34].
Unlearning Baselines We compare LUNAR against (1) gradient-based methods: Gradient Ascent
(GA) [19, 54], Gradient Difference (GD) [26], and GA with KL regularization (UKL); (2) preference
optimization (PO)-based methods: Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [42] and Negative Preference Optimization (NPO) [58]; (3) Representation Misdirection method (RMU) [24] and (4) ‘retrain
from scratch’ (a form of exact unlearning), which fine-tunes the base model using only the retain
dataset. Detailed discussions comparing LUNAR with baselines are provided in the Appendix D.

6

Figure 2: PCA visualization of activation space post LUNAR unlearning: (a) unlearn edge AB from the PISTOL
dataset; (b) unlearn the first author from the TOFU dataset; (c) unlearn factual dataset from base model with
reference dataset be the harmful dataset; (d) unlearn factual dataset from base model with reference dataset be
the unverifiable dataset. Base model and PISTOL/TOFU SFT models are Llama2-based.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Optimization We optimize LLUNAR (Eq. 6) using all forget data points and an equal number of
randomly sampled retain data points, a setting that we find to be sufficient empirically. This also
represents a practical choice, as the retain set is typically much larger.

6

Results

6.1

Unlearning Performance

Table 2 shows that LUNAR achieves SOTA unlearning performance, as evidenced by lower deviation
scores (up to 11.7x reduction on the PISTOL dataset with Gemma-7B model) and superior control
scores. Examples in Table 1 and Appendix F.1 further visualize LUNAR’s superior controllability,
significantly reducing hallucinations and improving the coherent expression of its inability to respond
within the conversational context. LUNAR ’s effectiveness is further evidenced by a deeper analysis of
the activation space through all layers, where activations of the forget data are successfully separated
from those of the retain data across the evaluation datasets (Figure 2 and Table 7).
Interestingly, we also found that fine-tuning with the retained set (a form of exact unlearning)
does not guarantee sufficient content regulation, as unlearned knowledge can be reintroduced
in-context, allowing the model to behave as if it retains the forgotten knowledge. This echoes with
arguments in [47]. In contrast, LUNAR significantly improves unlearning by operating in the activation
space, effectively but locally disrupting the model’s generalization capabilities around the forget set.
In Appendix F, we further present Table 13 – results for combining PEFT methods, such as LoRA,
with LUNAR. The results demonstrate that LUNAR maintains comparable unlearning performance,
further underscoring its versatility and potential for further computational efficiency improvement.
Additionally, Table 12 shows that the LUNAR unlearned model maintains the base model’s performance
on downstream tasks, confirming that LUNAR performs targeted, minimally invasive interventions that
removes specific knowledge without degrading general model capabilities.
6.2

Unlearning Pre-trained Data from Base Models

We observe that modern LLMs exhibit an ability to express a lack of knowledge when presented with
fictitious or unverifiable questions. This ability is often stronger in pre-trained models compared
to SFT models [46]. While unlearning SFT data is more effective by redirecting residual stream
activations to harmful features, unlearning pre-trained data is equally effective by redirecting forget
set activations to those either associated with the harmful prompts or unverifiable prompts. The
effectiveness of LUNAR in unlearning pre-trained data is presented in Table 3.
6.3

Unlearning Sequentially

Another practical scenario in LLM unlearning deployment involves private data being removed
incrementally over time, as unlearning requests arrive sequentially. Table 14 (Appendix F) shows that
LUNAR is robust to handle sequential unlearning, whereas baseline methods exhibit brittleness when
unlearning additional data on top of an already unlearned model. LUNAR consistently achieves strong
results across different models, comparable to the performance observed in single-round unlearning.

7

Table 2: Comparison of LUNAR ’s unlearning performance with retraining and baseline methods across models.
Metrics are marked with ↑ (higher is better) and ↓ (lower is better); best results in bold. Note that PISTOL
provides a clearer evaluation due to concise ground truth, while TOFU’s open-ended QAs lead LUNAR to
generate contextual tokens, increasing ROUGE1-based deviation scores despite effective expression of its lack
of knowledge. Results on newer model generations in the Appendix confirm LUNAR ’s generalizability.
Method

Llama2-7B

Gemma-7B

Qwen2-7B

Deviation
Score (DS) ↓

Compare
to Best DS

Control
Score ↑

Deviation
Score (DS) ↓

Compare
to Best DS

Control
Score ↑

Deviation
Score (DS) ↓

Compare
to Best DS

Control
Score ↑

PISTOL
Retrain
GA
GD
UKL
DPO
NPO
RMU

34.1
52.4
54.9
54.3
22.8
39.8
58.6

4.4x
6.7x
7.0x
7.0x
2.9x
5.1x
7.5x

0.355
0.353
0.355
0.394
0.524
0.352
0.351

26.1
57.6
35.5
73.5
23.4
26.6
38.3

4.1x
9.1x
5.6x
11.7x
3.7x
4.2x
6.1x

0.358
0.351
0.358
0.352
0.692
0.359
0.341

33.0
32.7
30.6
54.4
24.6
30.7
60.4

5.5x
5.5x
5.2x
9.1x
4.1x
5.2x
10.2x

0.356
0.359
0.358
0.348
0.594
0.353
0.348

LUNAR

7.8

1.0x

0.677

6.3

1.0x

0.701

5.9

1.0x

0.640

TOFU
Retrain
GA
GD
UKL
DPO
NPO
RMU

31.7
40.7
37.2
60.6
15.2
33.4
64.8

2.1x
2.7x
2.5x
4.1x
1.0x
2.2x
4.3x

0.429
0.456
0.453
0.361
0.515
0.509
0.429

32.5
49.6
49.6
86.0
20.2
44.4
62.1

2.4x
3.7x
3.7x
6.4x
1.5x
3.3x
4.7x

0.425
0.460
0.462
0.402
0.588
0.487
0.399

36.1
27.5
25.2
74.5
60.7
26.7
69.1

2.4x
1.9x
1.7x
5.0x
4.1x
1.8x
4.8x

0.402
0.383
0.422
0.401
0.433
0.477
0.406

LUNAR

14.9

1.0x

0.608

13.1

1.0x

0.659

14.3

1.0x

0.609

Table 3: Performance of unlearning individual factual
data points from base models demonstrates that activation redirection is effective using either harmful or
unverifiable prompts as Dref in Eq. 5.
Forget
ROUGE1 ↓

Retain
ROUGE1 ↑

Control
Score ↑

Table 4: Attack performance comparing different
models and attack methods on the PISTOL dataset
(ROUGE1 of the forget set). The Layer Skip and Reverse Direction attacks bypass or reverse activation
redirection layers, respectively. Quantization applies
4-bit precision to the full model.

Harmful
Unverifiable

0.000
0.000

0.981
0.986

0.694
0.654

Model

LUNAR
(Top-K)

Layer
Skip

Reverse
Direction

4-bit
Quant.

Prompt
Paraphrase

Llama3-8B

Harmful
Unverifiable

0.000
0.000

0.981
0.976

0.673
0.620

Llama2-7B

0.007

0.117

0.000

0.167

0.019

Gemma-7B

Harmful
Unverifiable

0.000
0.000

0.859
0.859

0.671
0.714

Llama3-8B

0.070

0.180

0.000

0.123

0.031

Qwen2-7B

Harmful
Unverifiable

0.000
0.000

0.977
0.980

0.683
0.625

Gemma-7B

0.060

0.150

0.000

0.060

0.036

Qwen2-7B

0.012

0.115

0.160

0.000

0.025

Harmful
Unverifiable

0.000
0.000

0.996
0.987

0.653
0.675

Qwen2.5-7B

0.183

0.100

0.000

0.000

0.032

Model

Dref

Llama2-7B

Qwen2.5-7B

6.4

Robustness Study

In this section, we show LUNAR is robust to white and black-box attacks, where the former operates
under strong assumptions that the attacker at least possesses full knowledge of the model weights.
Layer skip attack For a white-box deployed model, the layer skip attack is designed to bypass
the intervention layer(s), which can be effective given the ensemble nature of transformer architectures [51, 7]. In this scenario, performing activation redirection on multiple layers (identify top-K
layers through the layer selection process) serves as an effective defense. For Llama2-7B, selecting
top-K (K = 3) layers is an effective defense with ROUGE1 score only increasing marginally to
about 0.1 (Table 4), indicating minimal recovery of unlearned information. A closer examination of
generated outputs reveals this minor increase primarily stems from two factors: (1) unigram matches
between generated text and ground truth rather than accurate responses in their entirety, and (2)
questions with binary choices where the model occasionally guesses correctly (refer to examples of
post-attack responses in Appendix F.3). Overall, the unlearned model remains non-usable on the
forget set, underscoring the robustness of LUNAR against such attacks.
Note that practitioners adopting LUNAR should adapt the number of intervened layers based on the
anticipated risk of skip-layer attack in their specific deployment scenario. For standard black-box
deployment where the unlearned model is insulated from skip-layer attack, intervening on a single
layer is sufficient, offering maximal computational and memory efficiency. Conversely, in scenarios

8

with a tangible risk of skip-layer attack, we demonstrate that intervening on the top-K layers provides
an effective and robust defense.
Reverse direction attack This attack strategy assumes a white-box attacker has full knowledge of
(l)
the layer selection and the exact Unlearning Vectors (UVs) rU V used in the unlearning process. In
this case, the attacker performs reverse engineering in order to recover pre-unlearning activations by
ablating the UV from post-unlearning activations of the selected layer. This is achieved by doing:
(l)
(l)
(l)
aattack (x) ← aunlearned (x) − rUV .
We report the attack results in Table 4, demonstrating that it is ineffective against the LUNAR unlearned
model. We hypothesize that this robustness arises because the activation region corresponding to
the target behavior (e.g., acknowledging a lack of knowledge) is broad whereas those for instancelevel knowledge (e.g., forget set data points) are highly precise (i.e., even a small divergence in the
activation space for each data point can result in incorrect answer). During unlearning, the stochastic
nature of down-projection matrix optimization prevents the loss from fully converging to zero. As
a result, reversing the activation redirection process fails to map the activations back to their exact
(l)
(l)
original state (aattack (x) ̸= aoriginal (x)), thereby rendering the attack ineffective.
We also investigated a variant attack where the adversary is assumed to know the forget set questions
and attempts to extract the corresponding answers by computing the unlearning vector from the
unlearned model. Our evaluation on the Llama-7B model yielded a ROUGE1 score of only 0.025.
This result confirms that no meaningful information regarding the forgotten answers was recovered,
thereby demonstrating LUNAR’s robustness against such attack variant.
Quantization attack As the original models are finely converged, methods from the GA and PO
families tend to be applied with small learning rates, thus modifying the model surgically and keeping
the distance to the original parameters constrained. [60] observe that mere quantization to 8 or 4 bits
is sufficient to bring such models close to the quantized form of their original parameters before the
unlearning process, increasing their retention of intended forgotten knowledge by up to 4×.
By focusing only on the down-projection matrix, LUNAR is designed to heavily modify a specific
subset of parameters, rather than subtly modifying more across layers. Thus, we postulate that it is
likely to be far more resilient to quantization attacks (proposed by [60]) than the GA and PO-based
baselines, and we evaluate this by reproducing both the 4-bit and 8-bit attacks of [60]. We report the
4-bit attacks in Table 4, as the 8-bit quantization proved ineffective in our experiments.
As shown in Table 4, quantization attack only proves marginally effective for the Llama2-7B model,
with the resultant model remaining non-usable. Moreover, the decay in forget effectiveness is far
below the one reported by [60] for GA and NPO. For the other models, quantization either does not
change forget performance (Gemma-7B) or further enhances forgetting (Qwen2/2.5-7B).
Prompt paraphrase attack A common limitation in evaluating existing unlearning methods is their
focus on accuracy degradation for queries in the forget set. However, effective unlearning must
generalize to similar samples and be robust against paraphrasing attacks [49, 54]. To evaluate this, we
compiled a set of paraphrased prompts from the PISTOL dataset using GPT-4 and ran inference on
the LUNAR unlearned model. Table 4 demonstrates that paraphrased prompts fail to extract unlearned
information from the LUNAR unlearned model, showcasing its robustness against such attacks.
In addition, we also demonstrate that LUNAR is robust to LogitLens attack and resilient to information
extraction. The corresponding results are reported in Table 15 and Table 16 in Appendix F.2.

7

Related Works

Machine Unlearning Machine unlearning is gaining recognition for its significance and potential,
yet it remains a relatively under-explored field. Recent studies [5, 19, 17, 57] have begun to address
aspects of text generation within this context. Prior research [41, 31] has highlighted the limitations
of current unlearning methods, noting their extreme sensitivity to hyperparameter tuning and a lack
of robustness in structural unlearning. These challenges complicate their deployment in practical,
real-world applications. Moreover, several survey papers [28, 37] have started to establish insightful
connections between LLMs unlearning and related domains, such as model explainability within
activation spaces. Our study includes several widely recognized unlearning baselines in Appendix D.

9

LLM Features and Activations LLMs are widely believed to represent features as linear directions
within their activation space [36, 10, 39]. Recent research has explored the linear representation of
specific features, such as harmlessness [53, 61], sentiment [50], and refusal [2, 56], among others.
These features are often derived from contrastive input pairs [38] and have been shown to enable
effective inference-time control of model behavior [14, 48, 20] or the targeted removal of information
from parameters [43]. Additionally, the difference-in-means method has proven effective in isolating
key feature directions, as shown in prior work [33, 48]. This approach allows for effectively separating
and steering LLMs within the activation space. This paper demonstrates that contrastive input pairs
are not a prerequisite for effective activation steering and extends prior approaches by subjecting
linear features to perturbations applied to the forget set of the model’s embedding space during
unlearning. This establishes a link between interpretability and robust unlearning methods for LLMs.

8

Conclusion

We propose LUNAR, a simple and effective method that achieves superior unlearning performance and
controllability. Through demonstrating that contrastive features are not a prerequisite for targeted
activation steering, we show LUNAR performs remarkably well even for highly precise data points
unlearning. We also show the effectiveness of limiting parameter updates to a single down-projection
matrix, a novel design that not only provides convergence, but also significantly improves unlearning
efficiency and robustness. Empirical analysis further demonstrates LUNAR’s robustness against
adversarial attacks and its versatility in addressing real-world applications, such as unlearning data
from both pre-training and fine-tuning stages, and handling sequential unlearning tasks.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the following entities: The Royal Academy of Engineering via
DANTE (a RAEng Chair); the European Research Council, specifically the REDIAL project; SPRIND
under the composite learning challenge; Google through a Google Academic Research Award; in
addition to both IMEC and the Ministry of Education of Romania (through the Credit and Scholarship
Agency).
